.TH IMDTODSK 1 "2025-01-18" "Version 1.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
imdtodsk \- convert ImageDisk (IMD) files to DSK format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B imdtodsk
.I INPUT.IMD
.I OUTPUT.DSK
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B imdtodsk
converts ImageDisk (IMD) format disk images to DSK format. The program is optimized for MDOS (Motorola Disk Operating System) disk images that use 128-byte sectors and up to 26 sectors per track.

The utility reads the IMD file structure, including track headers, sector maps, and various sector data formats, then writes the sectors sequentially to create a DSK file. The conversion process preserves all data while handling IMD-specific features like compressed sectors and missing data.

.SH FILE FORMATS
.TP
.B ImageDisk (IMD) Format
A flexible disk image format created by Dave Dunfield that stores:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
ASCII comment header terminated by 0x1A
.IP \(bu 2
Track headers with cylinder, head, and sector information
.IP \(bu 2
Optional cylinder and head maps
.IP \(bu 2
Sector data in various formats (normal, compressed, unavailable)
.IP \(bu 2
Support for different sector sizes and recording modes
.RE

.TP
.B DSK Format
A simple sequential disk image format where:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Sectors are stored in linear order: track 0 sectors 0-25, track 1 sectors 0-25, etc.
.IP \(bu 2
Each sector is exactly 128 bytes for MDOS compatibility
.IP \(bu 2
Missing or invalid sectors are filled with zeros
.IP \(bu 2
No metadata or compression is preserved
.RE

.SH CONVERSION PROCESS
The conversion follows these steps:

.TP
.B 1. IMD Parsing
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Read and display the IMD comment header
.IP \(bu 2
Parse track headers for each cylinder
.IP \(bu 2
Read sector number maps (converts from 1-based to 0-based numbering)
.IP \(bu 2
Process optional cylinder and head maps if present
.RE

.TP
.B 2. Sector Data Handling
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Type 0 (Unavailable): Fill with zeros
.IP \(bu 2
Type 1 (Normal): Copy 128 bytes directly
.IP \(bu 2
Type 2 (Compressed): Expand single fill byte to 128 bytes
.IP \(bu 2
Other types: Treat as normal data with warning
.RE

.TP
.B 3. DSK Generation
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Write sectors in sequential track order
.IP \(bu 2
Fill missing sectors with zeros to maintain geometry
.IP \(bu 2
Only include tracks that contain valid data
.IP \(bu 2
Maintain 26 sectors per track for MDOS compatibility
.RE

.SH OPTIONS
.B imdtodsk
takes exactly two arguments and supports no options. The program operation is automatic based on the input file content.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The program provides detailed progress information:

.TP
.B Parsing Information
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
IMD comment header content
.IP \(bu 2
Track-by-track parsing progress
.IP \(bu 2
Sector count and validity statistics
.IP \(bu 2
Warning messages for unusual sector types
.RE

.TP
.B Conversion Results
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Number of tracks and sectors processed
.IP \(bu 2
Count of valid vs. total sectors
.IP \(bu 2
DSK file writing progress
.IP \(bu 2
Final conversion statistics
.RE

.SH ERROR HANDLING
.B imdtodsk
handles various error conditions gracefully:

.TP
.B File Access Errors
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Missing or unreadable input files
.IP \(bu 2
Permission issues with output directory
.IP \(bu 2
Disk space problems during writing
.RE

.TP
.B Format Errors
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Corrupted IMD headers or data
.IP \(bu 2
Unexpected end-of-file conditions
.IP \(bu 2
Invalid sector numbering or maps
.RE

.TP
.B Data Integrity
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Out-of-range track or sector numbers
.IP \(bu 2
Inconsistent sector counts
.IP \(bu 2
Unknown sector data types
.RE

.SH LIMITATIONS
.TP
.B MDOS Optimization
The converter is optimized for MDOS disk images with specific characteristics:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
128-byte sectors only
.IP \(bu 2
Maximum 77 tracks (0-76)
.IP \(bu 2
26 sectors per track (1-26 in IMD, 0-25 in DSK)
.IP \(bu 2
Single-sided disk images
.RE

.TP
.B Data Loss
Some IMD features are not preserved in DSK format:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Comment headers and metadata
.IP \(bu 2
Recording mode information
.IP \(bu 2
Sector compression (expanded to full size)
.IP \(bu 2
Track timing or formatting details
.RE

.SH EXAMPLES
Convert a basic MDOS disk image:
.RS
.B imdtodsk system.imd system.dsk
.RE

Convert with verbose output:
.RS
.B imdtodsk source.imd target.dsk
.RE

Batch conversion using shell scripting:
.RS
.B for f in *.imd; do imdtodsk "$f" "${f%.imd}.dsk"; done
.RE

.SH FILES
.TP
.I INPUT.IMD
Source ImageDisk format file containing the disk image to convert.

.TP
.I OUTPUT.DSK
Target DSK format file that will be created. If the file exists, it will be overwritten.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful conversion completed.
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred during conversion (file access, format issues, or data corruption).

.SH COMPATIBILITY
.B imdtodsk
is designed for cross-platform compatibility:
.IP \(bu 2
Standard C library functions for maximum portability
.IP \(bu 2
Binary file I/O with proper byte ordering
.IP \(bu 2
Works with IMD files from various disk imaging tools
.IP \(bu 2
Compatible with DSK files used by MDOS emulators

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dsktoimd (1),
.BR mdosextract (1),
.BR file (1),
.BR hexdump (1)

ImageDisk utility and IMD format documentation by Dave Dunfield.

MDOS technical documentation for Motorola development systems.

.SH AUTHOR
Written for MDOS disk image conversion and analysis.

.SH BUGS
Report bugs and suggestions to the maintainer.

The converter assumes standard MDOS disk geometry and may not work correctly with non-standard sector sizes or track layouts.

.SH VERSION HISTORY
.TP
.B 1.2
Current version with improved error handling and MDOS optimization.
.TP
.B 1.0
Initial release with basic IMD to DSK conversion.
